Hooks documentation (#1539)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/reference/hooks.md

---
layout: default
title: Hooks

> parent: Reference

Reviewer: I would suggest having this as a top-level item in the docs tree

Author: Done.

nav_order: 10
has_children: false
---

# Configurable Hooks
Like other version control systems, lakeFS allows the configuration of `Actions` to trigger when predefined events occur.
 
Supported Events:
1. `pre_commit` - Action runs when the commit occurs, before the commit is finalized.
2. `pre_merge` - Action runs when the merge occurs, before the merge is finalized.
 

> lakeFS `Actions` are handled per repository and cannot be reused.  

Author: Yes, rephrased.

> Failure of any `Hook` under any `Action` will result in aborting the lakeFS operation that is taking place.

Author: Done.

## Action
An `Action` is a list of `Hooks` with the same trigger configuration.

> `Hooks` list under an `Action` is ordered and an `Hook` will only be executed if all previous `Hooks` passed.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Hooks` under an `Action` are ordered, and a `Hook` will only be executed if all previous `Hooks` had passed.
```

### Hook

> An `Hook` is the basic building block of an `Action`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Hook` is the basic building block of an `Action`. 
```

> Failure of a single `Hook` will stop the execution of the containing `Action` and fail the `Run`. 

Reviewer: This is true for the two types of hooks currently supported. Obviously i won't be the case for `post-merge`, will it? I suggest documenting this above when explaining the current types.

Author: Right, Done.

### Action file

> Schema of the Action file:

Reviewer: At this point in reading the doc, I don't know what an Action file is - perhaps explain the concept in a seperate paragraph prior to this one (hooks are managed by writing to prefix in the lakeFS repository, this allows configuration-as-code inside lakeFS, action files are declerative and written in YAML, ...). After such a paragraph, this one would make sense :)

Author: Done.

|Property          |Description                                            |Required |Default Value
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------|--------------------------------------|
|name              |Identify the Action file                               |false    | If missing, filename is used instead 

> |on                |List of events that will trigger the hooks             |true     |

Reviewer: please specify data type (string? array of strings? enum of certain values?)

Author: Done.

|on<event>.branches|Glob pattern list of branches that triggers the hooks  |false    | If empty, Action runs on all branches
|hooks             |List of hooks to be executed                           |true     | 
|hook.id           |ID of the hook, must be unique within the `Action`     |true     | 
|hook.type         |Type of the hook (currently only `webhook` supported   |true     | 
|hook.properties   |Hook's specific configuration                          |true     | 

Example:
```yaml
name: Good files check
description: set of checks to verify that branch is good
on:
  pre-commit:
  pre-merge:
    branches:

>       - master

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - main
```

Author: Done.

hooks:
  - id: no_temp
    type: webhook
    description: checking no temporary files found
    properties:
      url: "https://your.domain.io/webhook?notmp=true?t=1za2PbkZK1bd4prMuTDr6BeEQwWYcX2R"
  - id: no_freeze
    type: webhook
    description: check production is not in dev freeze
    properties:
      url: "https://your.domain.io/webhook?nofreeze=true?t=1za2PbkZK1bd4prMuTDr6BeEQwWYcX2R"
```

## Run

> `Run` is the instantiation of the repo `Action` files when the event occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Run` is an instantiation of the repository's `Action` files when the triggering event occurs. For example, If our repository contains a pre-commit hook, every commit would generate a `Run` for that specific commit. 
```

Author: Done.

> lakeFS will fetch, parse and filter the repository `Action` files and start to execute the `Hooks` under each `Action`.
> All executed `Hooks` (each with `hook_run_id`) exists in the context of that `Run` (`run_id`).   

Reviewer 2: This is too low-level IMHO.
```suggestion
Once an event occurs, the `Hooks` from the relevant `Action` files are executed.
```

Author: Need the different run ids explanations for the API to make sense.

## How to upload Action files
`Action` files should be uploaded with the prefix `_lakefs_actions/` to the lakeFS repository.
When an actionable event (see Supported Events above) takes place, lakeFS will read all files with prefix `_lakefs_actions/`
in the repository branch where the action occurred. 

> A failure to parse an `Action` file will result with the event aborted. 

Reviewer 2: Again, not applicable to hooks in general

Author: Done.

 
For example, lakeFS will search and execute all matching `Action` files with the prefix `lakefs://repo1/feature-1/_lakefs_actions/` on:
1. Commit to `feature-1` branch on `repo1` repository. 

> 2. Merge to `master` branch from `feature-1` branch on `repo1` repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Merge to `main` branch from `feature-1` branch on `repo1` repository.
```

Author: Done.

## Runs API

> OpenAPI endpoint exposes the results of `Runs` execution per repository, branch, commit and specific `Action`.

Reviewer 2: This section is not clear. Need to rephrase and elaborate.

The endpoint also allows to download the execution log of any executed `Hook` under each `Run` for observability.

> ### Run results objectstore files 

Author: Done.

> There are 2 types of files that are stored in the metadata section of lakeFS repository with each `Run`:

Reviewer 2: Maybe clarify that the metadata section lives in the underlying storage and not the repository.

Author: Done.

> 1. `_lakefs/actions/log/<<runID>>/<<hookRunID>>.log` - Execution log of the specific `Hook` run.

Reviewer: Why the double brackets? is that a markdown thing?

Author: Removed.

2. `_lakefs/actions/log/<<runID>>/run.manifest` - Manifest with all `Hooks` execution for the run with their results and additional metadata.

> ## Type of hooks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Hook Types
```

> Currently, there's only a single type of `Hooks` that is supported by lakeFS, the `webhook`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, there's only a single type of `Hooks` that is supported by lakeFS: `webhook`.
```

Author: Done.

> Currently, there's only a single type of `Hooks` that is supported by lakeFS, the `webhook`.

Author: Done.

## Webhooks

> A `Webhook` is an `Hook` type that sends an HTTP POST request to the configured URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Webhook` is a `Hook` type that sends an HTTP POST request to the configured URL.
```

Author: Done.

Any non 2XX response by the responding endpoint will fail the `Hook`, cancel the execution of the following `Hooks` 
under the same `Action` and abort the operation that triggered the `Action`.

**Warning:** Actions Run is a blocking operation - users should not use the webhook for long-running tasks (e.g. Running Spark jobs and waiting to completion).

> Moreover, since the branch is locked during the execution, any write operation to the branch (like uploading file or committing) by the webhook server is bound to create a deadlock.

Reviewer: AFAIU, it currently won't deadlock, but will instead simply fail

Author: Done.

{: .note } 

### Action file Webhook properties

|Property          |Description                                            |Required |Default Value

> |------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------|--------------------------------------|

Reviewer: Please add data type

Author: Done.

|url               |The URL address of the request                         |true     |
|timeout           |Time to wait for response before failing the hook      |false    | 1m 
|query_params      |List of query params that will be added to the request |false    |

Example:
```yaml
...
hooks:
  - id: prevent_user_columns
    type: webhook
    description: Ensure no user_* columns under public/
    properties:
      url: "http://<host:port>/webhooks/schema"
      timeout: 1m30s
      query_params:
        disallow: ["user_", "private_"]
        prefix: public/
...
```

### Request body schema

> A JSON object with the following fields:

Reviewer 2: Upon
```suggestion
Upon execution, a webhook will send a request containing a JSON object with the following fields:
```

|HookID            |ID of the `Hook`                                                                       |string|                         |
|RepositoryID      |ID of the Repository                                                                 |string|
|BranchID          |ID of the Branch                                                                     |string|
|SourceRef         |Reference to the source that triggered the event (source Branch for commit or merge) |string|
|CommitMessage     |The message for the commit (or merge) that is taking place                           |string|
|Committer         |Name of the committer                                                                |string|
|CommitMetadata    |The metadata for the commit that is taking place                                     |string|

Example:
```json
{
  "event_type": "pre-merge",
  "event_time": "2021-02-28T14:03:31Z",
  "action_name": "test action",
  "hook_id": "prevent_user_columns",
  "repository_id": "repo1",
  "branch_id": "feature-1",
  "source_ref": "feature-1",
  "commit_message": "merge commit message",
  "committer": "committer",
  "commit_metadata": {
    "key": "value"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Missing a link to the API reference and the CLI hooks sub-command. 
Also, I'd add another paragraph at the beginning explaining some of the use cases for this (you can take example from the lakeFS-hooks repo)

Author: Done.
